this is a graph looking at the US
national debt over time looking at it
you'll see the amount is well over3
trillion which is absolutely insane more
concerningly this deep increase shows no
signs of slowing down in fact it's only
getting bigger and bigger from 2023 to
2024 alone it grew in $6.4 billion of
new debt every single day and $1
trillion every 100 days now what does
this all mean
because on the surface I mean this
sounds catastrophic and like something
waiting to implode but is this actually
the case well the truth is the actual
debt amount doesn't matter too much at
least historically but rather a better
metric to go by is a debt to GDP ratio
so if we look at a graph of this and
it's actually not that good either the
ratio is currently over 100% meaning
that the amount of debt exceeds the
financial activity within the economy
this is obviously not an ideal thing and
if we look at the interest payments on
the national debt it nearly doubled from
$345 billion in 2020 to $659 billion in
2023 with the Congressional budget
office putting its total at $892 billion
for 2024 which means for the first time
ever it will cost more than even our
military which we all know is insanely
funded since interest payments are also
the fastest growing portion of the
federal budget it's only a matter of
time before they absorb the majority of
the government's budget which it's
projected to do so by
2051 but how did we get here in the
first place how did the country with the
biggest economy in history let their
debt spiral out of control well to
answer that is obviously pretty complex
as it's been built up over Centuries
with countless economic foreign policy
and infrastructure decisions adding to
it but to highlight the most significant
historical moments which shape the
nation's Current financial landscape we
can start from the very beginning but
first it's important to understand the
types of debt the US has and there's
really just two public debt where the
government sells treasury bills notes
and bonds to outside investors including
foreign governments and then there's
intergovernmental debt from its own
programs such as Social Security
Medicare and retirement funds now back
to history if we look at a full chart of
the US's debt percentage of the GDP
since its founding some key moments are
painted a bit clearer The History of the
United States public debt began with
federal government debt incurred during
the American Revolutionary War after the
country's formation in
1776 Alexander Hamilton a founding
father and the first treasury secretary
Consolidated the federal and state debts
amounting to around $77 million at the
time or $2.6 billion today in what was
known as the compromise of 1790 these
policies laid the foundation for the
modern US Financial system establishing
Federal creditworthiness and the
issuance of government bonds over the
next 70 years the government resumed
debt reduction efforts so successfully
in fact that for the single year of 1835
the US had paid off the entirety the
only time in its history that it had a
zero national debt lasting for Just 2
years however when the Civil War erupted
in the 1860s debt drastically increased
from around $65 million to nearly $3
billion by the end of it and insane
4,000% increase the cost of the war led
to the introduction of new taxes
including the first US income tax and
greatly expanded the federal
government's borrowing practices setting
a precedent for financing future
conflicts through debt this is exactly
what happened in the 20th century
starting with extensive borrowing to
finance participation in the first world
war pushed debt to about 25 billion in
1919 in hindsight this was a small
change as debt skyrocketed due to World
War II spending reaching around 260
billion by 1945 more than 100% of GDP
which was a first yet despite the high
debt post-war economic growth was robust
and in part successfully managed by
growing the economy through industrial
expansion and consumerism eventually
even though the actual debt amount
remained relatively stable the debt to
GDP ratio decreased as the economy
expanded which is what actually matters
but if we wanted to jump to where
everything started to snowball from we'd
look from the 80s with the economic
policies of President Ronald Reagan also
known as the famous Reaganomics which in
many ways still persist today the
results of Reaganomics are still
debatable to put it lightly supporters
point to the end of stagflation stronger
GDP growth and an entrepreneurial
revolution in the decades that followed
while critics point to the widening
income gap and reduced economic Mobility
that came to be known as the failed
triple down economics
regardless of what you think though one
thing is for certain in Reagan's 8 years
of presidency the national debt tripled
from around $900 billion in 1980 to $2.7
trillion by 1989 ultimately reversing
the post World War II trend of a
shrinking national debt as percentage of
GDP this also marked the start of modern
deficit driven debt expansion
exacerbated by high military spending
and lower tax revenues the
irresponsibility of running annual
deficits would eventually lead to the
irredeemable crisis currently being
experienced that brings us to the next
relevant jump in 2008 during the Great
Recession while this stemmed from a
housing bubble bursting and subprime
mortgage lending the US government's
response included significant stimulus
spending to revive the economy along
with bailouts for major financial
institutions deemed too big to fail
these measures such as the troubled
asset relief program and the American
Recovery and reinvestment act of 2009
significantly increased the federal debt
to paint a picture of this at the end of
2007 the US total federal debt was
around $9 trillion roughly 63% of GDP
and by the end of 2009 it was at 14.5
trillion or 83% of the GDP which was an
incredibly significant gain and we're
not even counting the lingering after
effects of it years later for context
the bubble burst only raised it from 55%
to 60% between 2001 and 2004 and finally
that leads us to today or at least the
pretty recent past where if you look at
from 2020 to 2024 has continued to
Skyrocket the reasons for this are
obvious I mean there was a whole
pandemic economic shutdown massive
unemployment stimulus checks given out
to every American and countless bailouts
to companies deemed too big to fail
resulting in trillions of dollars spent
by the government the total debt to GDP
ratio jumped from 106% in 2019 to 126%
in 2020 marking one of the fastest
increases in modern history now again
I'm not here to critique the policies of
this or anything I mean no one could
have planned for this but we can't talk
about the debt and not include this in
the timeline currently the debts over
$35 trillion and it's gotten to a point
where we know it's only ever going to
get higher and higher but like I said in
the beginning what does this all
actually mean well believe it or not
none of this actually means anything
anything kind of obviously it's
important but only kind of let me
explain in regard to the debt
theoretically it doesn't actually matter
how deep they go into it as long as
people are confident they're still going
to be able to pay it off and the way
they always pay it off is through
selling treasury bonds to both
individual and institutional investors
worldwide this is what actually matters
you may have heard of the statement full
faith and credit which the US is known
for around the world this is what it
actually means since forever really the
US has been such a strong and safe
investment that there's always willing
buyers America has been such a strong
and safe investment that it can sell
Securities for really low interest rates
sometimes even cheaper than the
inflation rate making the debt literally
cheaper than free for them that's their
strategy sell the promise of repayment
later to get money now and use that
money to invest it back into the economy
hoping to get enough growth that would
cover the interest on the debt when it
comes time to pay it off I hope that
made sense
for the investors they'd still receive
nominal interest payments but if
inflation outpaces the interest rate
their purchasing power declines in this
case they're effectively accepting a
guaranteed loss for the perceived safety
and liquidity of the US treasuries
people can't call in debts whenever so
the US can plan for decades ahead on how
to pay back its debt that's the power of
the Full Faith and Credit system now if
the US say almost defaults on its debt
every election cycle people might start
to get morees resitant making debt more
expensive and unsustainable if investor
confidence in the US debt drops interest
rates rise that can snowball into a
situation where rates just keep rising
and the only way for the government to
keep up is to print more money which can
lead to inflation and more it becomes a
vicious cycle and we've actually sort of
seen this in places like Argentina where
no one would loan Argentina money
without some severe restrictions on how
the government of Argentina spent the
money and when Argentina defaulted on
the terms of those loans multiple times
loans which required repayment in
dollars and not Argentinian Pesos which
Argentina could just print more of it
drove that country into the situation
it's more or less in today where no one
will loan them any money anymore this
isn't a risk for the us though because
they've never must a payment on their
debt and will basically never default on
it if they do it' be because of a
political decision not an economic one
the only clear example I know of a
national crisis brought on by debt owed
in the country's own currency is France
in 1926 and that story is extremely
complicated now why do we continue to
take on new debt though I mean we
essentially have to borrow a trillion
dollars to pay a trillion dollars in
interest which continuously costs us
more money so what's the point well
there's actually quite a few reasons for
this and I'll start with the things that
are most straightforward the first is
that the government does it to pay off
existing debt that is due which is
pretty straightforward this is
essentially a strategy to keep funding
ongoing operations without needing to
pay back the full debt at once the
second thing is that the US continues to
run in a budget deficit meaning it
spends more than it collects in Revenue
so they have to borrow money to make up
the difference the third thing is to
finance investments in infrastructure
education research and other public
services that in theory should spur
long-term economic growth the belief is
that this growth will increase tax
revenues in the future making it easier
to manage debt now this is where things
get interesting though because a major
reason the US is in debt and will
continue to remain in debt is that
people want to own America's debt see if
the US wasn't in debt it would actually
destabilize the world economy because
there wouldn't be this massive pool of
financial instruments that are all
considered to be the safest possible
Investments available to be traded on
the market the United States won't pay
its debt fully because it's that debt
that underpins global banking and trade
they want to stay in debt it's much
different than a person being in debt
remember they are the world's Reserve
currency which is OB incredible benefit
to them trying to pay down the debt
fully would cause a reduction in US
dollar circulation globally this makes
international trade and banking less
secure as the US dollar is a highly
trusted currency to hold funds and to
transact in no dollar means riskier
trade and riskier trade means less trade
and less trade means an overall poorer
quality of life for a lot of people in
the world you also have to think about
what happens if politicians try to lower
the debt because how would it work right
cutting spending is pretty intuitive but
that reduces the overall quality of life
of the nation do you cut welfare
programs so people in poverty have it
even worse do you cut military spending
but risk National Security or do you cut
subsidies in critical Industries and
risk economic turmoil Etc raising taxes
is obviously not popular either nobody
wants to pay more in taxes unless
they're going to get more in return you
can't raise taxes and provide the same
or even less benefits and then expect to
get reelected just because the debt down
people will simply be more miserable not
to mention it would also have a negative
impact on the economy too citizens will
have less money left over to spend less
on consumer goods companies paying more
taxes will hire fewer workers make fewer
investments in their company growth and
take on fewer research projects overall
raising taxes will slow the economy down
which in turn will reduce future tax
revenues so when you pay off the debt
without just printing more money you
either make the economy worse or you
make people's lives worse these won't
win any popularity contests so it's a
Sure Fire way to lose an election you
also have to think about the actual
debts we have too like I said earlier we
have public debt and intergovernmental
debt but if we want to look at it in a
slightly more in-depth way we divide the
debt like this there's the debt owned by
individual American investors
institutions and funds such as those
holding US Treasury bonds through 401ks
IRAs Pension funds mutual funds or or
direct Investments these make up 30 to
40% of the interest payments there's
debt owned by government agencies
primarily Social Security and Medicare
which make up around 20 to 25% of the
interest and then there's the debt owned
by the foreign holders like other
countries which make up 30 to 35% of the
interest payments and the rest is just
held by the Federal Reserve so all in
all most of the interest is going to
Americans only about a third is leaving
our economy so with all this being said
when do things get truly dangerous or in
other words when is the government
actually at risk of a crisis we already
know it's not about the actual debt
amount whether it be 10 35 or even 50
trillion but all that's really important
is maintaining the debt interest
payments here's the best part though as
long as the national debt is in US
dollars they can always pay it back the
treasury can just create more money to
pay off the debts of course there's
consequences if they do and even more
severe conse quences if they don't but
in the end it's basically always
possible the question of Are We
borrowing more than we can pay back is
always a smart question to ask but for
now it's not really an issue let's
assume though for a second that the US
does default on its debt what would
actually happen now this wouldn't be
something similar to something like the
viar Republic's hyperinflation as they
were dealing with foreign denominated
debt exacerbated by its need to pay
reparations from the Treaty of Versa
which were largely denominated in
foreign currencies like the British
pound and French Frank to make these
payments the vimar government printed
vast amounts of its own currency the
German Mark which caused its value to
collapse this led to hyperinflation
because although the Mark's value
plummeted domestically the government
still needed foreign currency to meet
its obligations for the US what
manifests would be a bit different but
don't get it twisted it would quite
literally be devastating for the entire
world still every Financial calculation
and eval Val ation Compares Investments
to us treasuries because they're assumed
to be risk-free to invalidate this core
assumption would be to remove the
foundation from the entire Financial
system the shock wave would be Beyond
devastating the full faith and credit
thing which the US is known for around
the world would suddenly not be the case
anymore it's tough to say what would
exactly happen because the reality is
nobody truly knows as it's never
happened before but if I had to guess
the US would no longer be able to borrow
money at the low interest rates that it
has been
so it would cost more money to borrow
money this would result in either a cut
in government services a tax hike or a
combination of both government employees
wouldn't be paid social welfare of all
kinds like veteran programs or Social
Security wouldn't be paid government
contracts for things like Highway
Maintenance wouldn't be paid the
unemployment rate would double at least
and everything would be more expensive
the US's credit rating would be
downgraded confidence in the dollar
would plummet and the trustworthiness of
the US on the global stage would would
be questioned leading to a loss of
influence this could lead to incredible
gains for the validity of bricks and may
even put china into a similar role that
the US is in now in short it would quite
literally the economies of most
of the western world and cause severe
short-term and long-term financial
crisis ultimately though it would depend
on how long a government's default would
last for the difference between it
lasting a week versus a month or more
can mean trillions of dollars and
millions of jobs wiped but nevertheless
it' be extremely costly if it happens in
the first place regardless for how long
if we look back at 2011 for example when
the US reached a crisis point where they
almost defaulted on the public debt due
to delays in raising the debt ceiling
which is the maximum amount of money the
US government can borrow to pay its
bulls and fund programs just the delay
itself resulted in the first downgrade
of the United States credit rating this
disaster which wasn't even an actual
default resulted in a loss of billions
of dollars ultimately from the S&P 5
100's closing 2011 Peak at the end of
April to its closing trough in October
the index lost almost 20% on a price
basis and from July 22nd to August 8th
Global equities declined by an average
of 133% again this wasn't a default but
just a credit downgrade in the end as
the debt continues to sore by the
trillions and will eventually reach 200%
of the GDP it will be interesting to see
what changes if any come from it it
definitely does look scary when just
looking at it off the bat though so who
knows what will happen thank you for
watching